---
mip: 0001
title: Execution Layer Forked Clients
author: calbera, rezbera
status: Review
created: 2025-06-02
type: Core
---

## Context

Berachain launched its "EVM-identical" mainnet on February 6th, 2025 with a CL (consensus layer) to EL (execution layer) architecture that resembles Ethereum's mainnet. For the CL, [beacon-kit](https://github.com/berachain/beacon-kit) is used (with an underlying [CometBFT](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft) consensus engine) and handles beacon chain compatibility as needed. For the EL, Berachain opted to allow unmodified clients such as [Geth](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum), [Reth](https://github.com/paradigmxyz/reth), [Nethermind](https://github.com/NethermindEth/nethermind), etc. With an EVM that is fully identical to that of Ethereum's mainnet, developers on Berachain could rely on the security, robust testing, and familiarity of Ethereum's ecosystem.

## Summary

Berachain benefited from using a vanilla EL to foster a strong developer community and boost developer adoption. After observing 4+ months of network performance, it has become clear that forking the EL to better suit Berachain's system is required. Predominantly this can be attributed to fundamental differences in network topology (Berachain being significantly more sparse than Ethereum) and block times/finality (Berachain having 2s block times with instant finality as opposed to Ethereum's 12s block time with soft finality).

To enforce this requirement, **only Geth and Reth forks will be supported by Berachain Labs** for ease and efficiency of maintainability. It still remains a goal to support major EIPs from the Ethereum spec as they are accepted into official hard forks.
 
## Motivation

Due to the network differences between Berachain and Ethereum, some features of the vanilla Ethereum specification do not bode well for Berachain's system. From observing real world traffic, network usage and performance, the following issues stand out (among others):

- Gas prices are too slow to respond causing many users to experience stuck transactions. EIP-1559's dynamic fee market must be adjusted for Berachain.
- The unmodified EL does not allow for enshrining Berachain's unique crypto-economic security model (Proof of Liquidity). Fundamental processes to chain health (like distribution of block rewards to block proposers) are not possible without external transactions.
- A potential increase in demand for block space (or gas throughput) may require re-working features of the EVM implementation itself.

## Specification

For maintenance of Geth and Reth software, we will use the following processes:

### CI

We must update CI/CD such that it is appropriate for our infrastructure set up.

### Diff Maintenance

We will use @protolambda's [Fork Diff](https://github.com/protolambda/forkdiff). The goal will be to maintain a clean diff for easier upstream merging.

Examples of geth forks which maintain diffs:
- https://geth.taiko.xyz/
- https://op-geth.optimism.io/

### Docs

We must clearly highlight the keys diffs in our fork. We must also include a `CHANGELOG.md` that highlights the changes made with each execution client release.

### Fork Naming

Most ELs with custom forks have a naming scheme. We will name our fork versions based on Ethereum's names with a suffix of which iteration number it is for the given hard fork. For example, the first iteration of Berachain's modified EL on the Prague hard fork will be named `Prague1`. The second iteration will be named `Prague2`, and so on.

This is similar to beacon-kit's convention for CL hard forks (e.g. `Deneb1`, `Electra`, `Electra1`, etc.).

### Releases

Our release naming strategy will follow the same pattern as [op-geth](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth), i.e. upstream fork version is part of the release version, such that it is clear what version of upstream we’re building upon. For example, https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/tag/v1.101511.0 clearly identifies that [TODO: ???].

## Rationale

Networks that offer an EVM (excluding Ethereum) have forked the vanilla EL clients to better suit their system (including Optimism, Polygon, Arbitrum, and many others). This is a common practice and is a good way to ensure that the network is able to function as expected given its unique system.

## Backward Compatibility

Depending on the specific changes made to the EL, a hard fork may or may not be required.

## Security Considerations  

Introducing modified behavior to the Ethereum spec always requires careful consideration and testing. Audits should be used as necessary.

## Copyright

All copyrights and related rights in this work are waived under CCO 1.0 Universal.
